---
title:  "Setting up a Jekyll site with a Streaming Service Worker"
date:   2017-09-18 01:03:14 +0100
image: /assets/dist/images/streaming-service-workers/streaming-service-workers.jpg
tags:
  - Streams
  - Service Worker
  - JavaScript
---

For my first foray into streams I decided to try and hook up this site, a static site generated by [Jekyll](https://jekyllrb.com/), with a streaming service worker.

## Wait, what's a stream?

According to Wikipedia, a stream is a ["sequence of data elements made available over time"](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stream_(computing)). They allow you to read and write asynchronous chunks of data, as and when they become available. There exist 3 different types of streams:

- **Readable Streams:** Represent a source of data, from which you can read. In other words, data comes out of a readable stream. Concretely, a readable stream is an instance of the ReadableStream class.
- **Writable Streams:** Represent a destination for data, into which you can write. In other words, data goes in to a writable stream. Concretely, a writable stream is an instance of the WritableStream class.
- **Transform Streams:** Consist of a pair of streams: a writable stream, and a readable stream. In a manner specific to the transform stream in question, writes to the writable side result in new data being made available for reading from the readable side. Concretely, any object with a writable property and a readable property can serve as a transform stream.

*Definitions taken from the [whatwg streams spec](streams.spec.whatwg.org)*

**N.B: Transform Streams have not been fully developed yet and as such are not available yet without a polyfill, more on this later..**